federalist 71
the duration in office of the executive
from the new york packet tuesday march
18 1788
hamilton
to the people of the state of new york
duration in office has been mentioned as
the second requisite to the energy of
the executive authority
this has relation to two objects to the
personal firmness of the executive
magistrate in the employment of his
constitutional powers and to the
stability of the system of
administration which may have been
adopted under his auspices
with regard to the first it must be
evident that the longer the duration in
office the greater will be the
probability of obtaining so important an
advantage it is a general principle of
human nature that a man will be
interested in whatever he possesses in
proportion to the firmness or
precariousness of the tenure by which he
holds it will be less attached to what
he holds by a momentary or uncertain
title than what he enjoys by a durable
or certain title and of course will be
willing to risk more for the sake of the
one than for the sake of the other
this remark is not less applicable to a
political privilege or honor or trust
than to any article of ordinary property
the inference from it is that a man
acting in the capacity of chief
magistrate under a consciousness that in
a very short time he must lay down his
office will be apt to feel himself too
little interested in it to hazard any
material censure or perplexity from the
independent exertion of his own powers
or from encountering the ill-humors
however transient which may happen to
prevail either in a considerable part of
the society itself or even in a
predominant faction in the legislative
body
if the case should only be that he might
lay it down unless continued by a new
choice and if he should be desirous of
being continued his wishes conspiring
with his fears would tend still more
powerfully to corrupt his integrity or
debase his fortitude
in either case feebleness and
irresolution must be the characteristics
of the station
there are some who would be inclined to
regard the servile pliancy of the
executive to a prevailing current either
in the community or in the legislature
as its best recommendation but such men
entertain very crude notions as well of
the purposes for which government was
instituted as of the true means by which
the public happiness may be promoted
the republican principle demands that
the deliberate sense of the community
should govern the conduct of those to
whom they entrust the management of
their affairs but it does not require an
unqualified complacence to every sudden
breeze of passion or to every transient
impulse which the people may receive
from the arts of men who flatter their
prejudices to betray their interests
it is a just observation that the people
commonly intend the public good this
often applies to their very errors but
their good sense would despise the
adulator who should pretend that they
always reason right about the means of
promoting it they know from experience
that they sometimes air and the wonder
is that they so seldom air as they do
beset as they continually are by the
wiles of parasites and sycophants by the
snares of the ambitious the avaricious
the desperate by the artifices of men
who possess their confidence more than
they deserve it and of those who seek to
possess rather than to deserve it
when occasions present themselves in
which the interests of the people are at
variance with their inclinations it is
the duty of the persons whom they have
appointed to be the guardians of those
interests to withstand the temporary
delusion in order to give them time and
opportunity for more cool and sedate
reflection instances might be cited in
which a conduct of this kind has saved
the people from very fatal consequences
of their own mistakes and has procured
lasting monuments of their gratitude to
the men who had courage and magnanimity
enough to serve them at the peril of
their displeasure but however inclined
we might be to insist upon an unbounded
complacence in the executive to the
inclinations of the people we can with
no propriety contend for like
complacence to the humors of the
legislature the latter may sometimes
stand in opposition to the former and at
other times the people may be entirely
neutral in either supposition it is
certainly desirable that the executive
should be in a situation to dare to act
his own opinion with vigor and decision
the same rule which teaches the
propriety of a partition between the
various branches of power teaches us
likewise that this partition ought to be
so contrived as to render the one
independent of the other
to what purpose separate the executive
or the judiciary from the legislative if
both the executive and the judiciary are
so constituted as to be at the absolute
devotion of the legislative
such a separation must be merely nominal
and incapable of producing the ends for
which it was established it is one thing
to be subordinate to the laws and
another to be dependent on the
legislative body
the first comports with the last
violates the fundamental principles of
good government and whatever may be the
forms of the constitution unites all
power in the same hands
the tendency of the legislative
authority to absorb every other has been
fully displayed and illustrated by
examples in some preceding numbers
in governments purely republican this
tendency is almost irresistible the
representatives of the people in a
popular assembly seem sometimes to fancy
that they are the people themselves and
betray strong symptoms of impatience and
disgust at the least sign of opposition
from any other quarter as if the
exercise of its rights by either the
executive or judiciary were a breach of
their privilege and an outrage to their
dignity
they often appeared disposed to exert an
imperious control over the other
departments and as they commonly have
the people on their side they always act
with such momentum as to make it very
difficult for the other members of the
government to maintain the balance of
the constitution
it may perhaps be asked how the
shortness of the duration in office can
affect the independence of the executive
on the legislature unless the one were
possessed of the power of appointing or
displacing the other
one answer to this inquiry may be drawn
from the principle already remarked that
is from the slender interest a man is
apt take in a short-lived advantage and
the little inducement it affords him to
expose himself on account of it to any
considerable inconvenience or hazard
another answer perhaps more obvious
though not more conclusive will result
from the consideration of the influence
of the legislative body over the people
which might be employed to prevent the
re-election of a man who by an upright
resistance to any sinister project of
that body should have made himself
obnoxious to its resentment
it may be asked also whether a duration
of four years would answer the end
proposed and if it would not whether a
less period which would at least be
recommended by greater security against
ambitious designs would not for that
reason be preferable to a longer period
which was at the same time too short for
the purpose of inspiring the desired
firmness and independence of the
magistrate
it cannot be affirmed that a duration of
four years or any other limited duration
would completely answer the end proposed
but it would contribute towards it in a
degree which would have a material
influence upon the spirit and character
of the government
between the commencement and termination
of such a period there would always be a
considerable interval in which the
prospect of annihilation would be
sufficiently remote not to have an
improper effect upon the conduct of a
man endued with a tolerable portion of
fortitude and in which he might
reasonably promise himself that there
would be enough time before it arrived
to make the community sensible of the
propriety of the measures he might
incline to pursue
though it'd be probable that as he
approached the moment when the public
were by a new election to signify their
sense of his conduct his confidence and
with it his firmness would decline yet
both the one and the other would derive
support from the opportunities which his
previous continuance the station had
afforded him of establishing himself in
the esteem and goodwill of his
constituents he might then hazard with
safety in proportion to the proofs he
had given of his wisdom and integrity
and to the title he had acquired to the
respect and attachment of his fellow
citizens as on the one hand a duration
of four years will contribute to the
firmness of the executive in a
sufficient degree to render it a very
valuable ingredient in the composition
so on the other it is not enough to
justify any alarm for the public liberty
if a british house of commons from the
most feeble beginnings from the mere
power of assenting or disagreeing to the
imposition of a new tax have by rapid
strides reduce the prerogatives of the
crown and privileges of the nobility
within the limits they conceived to be
compatible with the principles of a free
government while they raise themselves
to the rank and consequence of a
co-equal branch of the legislature if
they have been able in one instance to
abolish both the royalty and the
aristocracy and to overturn all the
ancient establishments as well in the
church as state if they have been able
on a recent occasion to make the monarch
tremble at the prospect of an innovation
this was the case with respect to mr
fox's india bill which was carried in
the house of commons and rejected in the
house of lords to the entire
satisfaction as it is said of the people
attempted by them what would be feared
from an elective magistrate of four
years duration with the confined
authorities of a president of the united
states what but that he might be unequal
to the task which the constitution
assigns him i shall only add that if his
duration be such as to leave a doubt of
his firmness that doubt is inconsistent
with the jealousy of his encroachments
publius